

## Predynastic Period
---
In the [[Predynastic]] and early period the [[naþamăqat]]
climate north and northeast of the [[qilinaq'a]] mountains was much less arid. These regions were covered in treed savanna and herds of grazing animals. Flora and fauna of all kinds were more prolific in all environs and the [[luhă]] river supported a large population of waterfowl. Hunting was common among nomadic groups. During this period many animals became domesticated.

The small tribes living in the mountains and basin had developed a series of cultures in two loosely connected groups. The tribes of the upper [[luhă]] rainforest and mountains developed and demonstrated a firm control over animal husbandry and light agriculture based around numerous species of plants with widely variable harvesting seasons. In the lower [[luhă]] basin, river islands, and low-lands the tribes dominated agriculture with the fertile soil of the river, fishing, carpentry, and weaving.

The tribes of the upper [[luhă]] developed into the [[mašambeþan]] culture with specialties in clothing, stone tools of high quality, and copper use. The [[umìšdăgal]] integrated with [[mašambeþan]] people, bringing with them changes in language, culture, appearance, customs, and various other traits. They remained proud of their identities and being descendent of both tribes was considered positive. Most of their language and beliefs were encoded into a magical, spiritual practice. This created a class of priests and introduced organized religion to the area. One effect this had was causing pride and resentment from internally regarding the degree of [[umìšdăgal]] lineage in their blood. The [[naθeþan]] culture arose from the farming communities on the south river bank and basin and excelled in the use of cultivated plants, fiber weaving, structural engineering of homes and physical communities, logistics, and ceramics. Additionally, [[naθeþan]] engineering saw the development of reed boats up to the creation of a double hull or double canoe.

From these three cultures emerged the [[Aluhăgal]] culture. The synergistic talents of each lead to rapid expansion and a number of technological improvements. Their ability to create watercraft to haul material and travel long distances for trade with the cultures living around the coastal savanna and the smaller groups, gave them a distinct advantage. Within 1000 years the [[Aluhăgal]] culture developed into a powerful civilization in control of the entire [[luhă]] valley, lowlands, southern desert, eastern islands and mountainous rainforest to the edge of the mountains.

The [[Aluhăgal]] culture manufactured a diverse selection of material goods, reflective of the increasing power they held. Societal personal use items were becoming characteristic of their developing tastes, which included combs, painted pottery, small idols and statuary, rudimentary dice for games, cosmetic palettes and mirrors, dyed garments of cultivated [[darjă]] and [[manq]], half-capes with girdles, and jewelry of silver and gold, with gemstones of red beryl, Paraiba tourmaline, and benitoite.  
They also developed efflorescence glazing for decorative ceramics. In the self-glazing process of efflorescence, the glazing materials, in the form of water-soluble alkali salts, are mixed with the raw crushed quartz of the core of the object. As the water in the body evaporates, the salts migrate to the surface of the object to recrystallize, creating a thin surface, which glazes upon firing. During the last [[Predynastic]] period , the [[Aluhăgal]] culture began using written symbols for the language that had evolved from years of conquest, migration, integration, and war. Though the symbols began as ceremonial sand drawings used by the [[umìšdăgal]] before the [[Aluhăgal]] culture began to take root, the system would eventually evolve into a full logographic-syllabary for writing the ancient [[enuebaš]] language.

As the cultural identity of the [[Aluhăgal]] comes into focus when the city of [[eþìzera]] undergoes dramatic renovation under the direction of a newly realized sentiment for cultivating equality, arts culture, craft, and intellectual practices. City organization was of primary concern with a focus on waste and water management, accessibility of basic needs to all, decentralized leadership centers, and sustainability for future growth. The highly organized labor and crafting traits of the [[naθeþan]] combined with the expertise and metallurgy of the [[umìšdăgal]],  and the indispensable knowledge of masonry and brickmaking of the [[mašambeþan]] lead the city into a new era. 
