# Mìþanaq Period
---
Though short over all, the importance of the period of time when the style and structure of settlements was developed, cannot be stressed enough.
##### City Planning
The city was structured into a model that mimicked the preculture's arrangement, with a High Town and a Low Town. These areas were not division of class or individuals, but signified two main areas of life.
Over 700 wells were prepared for the consideration of population growth and cylindrical stones resembling tall pots or jars were distributed all over the city for waste and garbage collection. Furthermore, high waste and pollutant industries, like brick making by kiln or tanning, were situated in satellites outside the city proper, with their own separate waste management and water supply to keep the city as clean as possible.
The city had no palaces, large holdings, or dedicated structures that served to signal wealth or importance for an individual or group over another.

###### High Town
High town took the form of a citadel and was the center of community and was placed on a mound or plateau. The placement held no significant meaning for the importance of the structure or those who resided there, but was strategically positioned against extreme weather, primarily floods. The citadel was walled and reinforced to served as shelter for all citizens in the event that the lower houses were not habitable or the city was under attack.
In the inner area of the citadel, raised platforms circled of granite acted as locations for gatherings, trading booths, plays, speeches, and general public areas for all to use.
Radiating out from that, larger structures that had specific purposes created a circular avenue or mall. More accurately this area was a campus that housed the primary centers for the numerous trades and crafts practiced in the city.
One of the largest structures in High Town was the communal bath. The tank measured over 900 feet and fed directly from a river this area was central to social life and romantic life in the city. It was structured into three tiers and at its deepest point had a depth of 11 m. The bottom of the tank consisted of massive polished granite blocks sealed with a tar-like resin.  Eight separate tanks of smaller sizes were built on the northern landing raised up above the view of citizens below. Superheating the brick pipes from below forced heated water into the tank for heated baths used for relaxation, celebration, and some ceremonies. These baths were of utmost cultural significance used in rituals, both personal and communal, and as a symbol of the continued connection with the great rivers that sustain the rainforests and life on the whole.
###### Low Town
Low Town was carefully plotted into grids with avenues wide enough to fit 1.5 beast led carts or roughly five adults abreast. Basins of clean flowing water were positioned even throughout the area for ease of access. Diverted streams and controlled underground swells were led into the avenues and homes in a combination of whole and half ceramic pipes. Every home was fitted with an angled bathing room that allowed for waste water to empty into the sewer system. They also came equipped with a multiple seat, mound toilet that either drained into the sewer and out of the city or into rudimentary septic tanks. Some houses were multilevel and built in gutter and piping systems would ensure that no waste water was emptied into the streets.
Each material unit was standardized and manufactured to specification for easy replacement and repair. Living quarters were arranged into groups of five and would be connected by a central garden to both continue the [[mašambeþan]]'s tradition of living in large extended family groups and to allow for individuals or smaller families to be in connection with others. These groups would each be responsible for the decoration and upkeep of their communal gardens.
##### Government
Centralized government didn't take any solid form within the city and community leaders, usually master artisans, engineers, artists, writers, and intellectuals would gather freely to discuss issues and plans day to day. A level of the mandatory societal service of the [[naθeþan]] remained in place, as adolescents and young adults were expected, if not required, to devout a significant portion of that time working directly for the city. This also manifested in the demand for all members of each household to be able to be called on to help settle disputes, problem solve, or perform other pseudo-governmental tasks as needed. Law wasn't codified into writing other than a general treatise of good faith, behavior, and well being within the society. Social ebbs and flows determined smaller scale expectations of behavior. Ostracization, exile, and the denying of access of facilities were the most common recourse for anti-social or criminal behavior. A small, but growing, self taught and regulated militia, was occasionally called on when matters could not be settled otherwise. This militia would later be a primary platform for the divergence between contemporary philosophies and ultimately the divide.

##### Spiritual Evolution
The site of [[eþìzera]] was originally chosen as a crux of gathering groups due to widely known spiritual and religious relic. It is likely that nomads in part settled this area and pursued agriculture because of this symbol as it predates all large scale farming communities in the area. The relic is a non-descript clay water basin of rough clay. This is where it is said that humans first learned that the river could flow into earth to create pottery and ceramics. The pot was attached at the base to the ground. The scorched outlines of hands covered the exterior. Inside was filled with a silvery, blue liquid that would kill you if you drank it. But, during an eclipse, one can drink a single mouthful and experience the tastes of all the rainforest and become one of mind and body, no longer separated into one of the three realms. During the remainder of the eclipse one who drank could traverse the world anew and seek answers from the beyond.
This relic continued to be used and remained an instrumental part of society. It was innocuously built around, careful to leave it enough space, in the Low Town.
This relic and practice would take place every 16 days on the eclipse as those who sought knowledge would drink from the pot, burn their handprint onto it, and find themselves in the baths under the slim scarlet ring barely illuminating the pitch black sky.
##### Cultural Divergence
As the city grew and this cultural renaissance came to its own, a small group of spiritualists from the [[umìšdăgal]] heritage along with followers, saw society as weak, frivolous, simple, and not representational of the true hierarchical struggles of life in nature. Citing the relationship of the planets and reality of the food chain, they proclaimed that strength and domination was as much of a skill as any held to high esteem by the greater community. Arguing, martial arts, critique, revelry, disobedience and denial of the structured path became primary practices.
This group was rallied to a larger cause with the arrival of a contingent of [[Aluhăgal]] who traveled further north and settled in the mountain pass. There they came into contact with the coastal cultures of [[amanten gaþem]] and [[amanten mašanaraze]]. They had been sent to plea with the people of [[eþìzera]] to take up arms to be able to fight when the inevitable conflict would arise after the settlement at [[qund'asaþ]] was conquered.
They were led by a charismatic warrior who had forsaken his name and was instead called [[maxleþaxulìtarìned]]. The term was derived from a prayer spoken during eclipse rituals. He believed that he had sacrificed his spirit to turn away from fear in the mission of turning his people from the worship of the celestials. In doing so, he became a sort of spirit or god himself, thinking himself beyond judgement of his society.
After spreading his message and gathering followers peacefully for a time, his methods become severe. To show the helplessness and weakness of the people, he organized raids and attacks on individual homes and industrial buildings. They were able to cause significant damage and halted many trades and causing severe problems with trade and agriculture. On a fateful evening during an eclipse he, and a few close followers, attacked the Low Town in the pitch black, causing panic. His true target was the relic. He cut a path to it, and threw mud and poisonous berries into the water attempting to taint it. He tried other means to no result. In the end he took the only option he had left, and destroyed the relic, shattering it into pieces.
When the clay settled something unexpected happened. The water inside the pot relic held shape momentarily before bursting out, into threads of silvery water, and into the darkened city. Each individual who was called to drink from the relic that night before the attack was touched by a silver line and changed forever.
When the dust settled and it was clear that the relic was destroyed, those who were silver touched came together displaying strange abilities only known to harnessed by spirits. The people of [[eþìzera]] rallied together behind them to fight and expel the interlopers from the city.
[[maxleþaxulìtarìned]]  fled and returned to the northern pass taking with him the growing number of followers. Soon after he declared himself the rightful ruler of the [[luhă]] and vowed to unite the basin valley.
In [[eþìzera]], those who were changed became known as the [[ahaqsatir]] or silver gifted. Over time they rebuilt the city with a newfound resolve to protect their way of life. The [[ahaqsatir]] initially tried to return to normal life, finding they had been changed to the point of not being able to go back to their lives. More confusion happened when on the next eclipse another separate group of individuals where touched and mutated. This continued, but with each next eclipse, one less person was touched. Eventually it stopped and a total of 61 [[ahaqsatir]] remained.
Over time the [[ahaqsatir]] found new roles in the community, sometimes using their new abilities to help others, or to rebuild. Even more time passed and the two sides battled to define the future of [[naþamăqat]] and their people. It was then discovered that the touch of the relic could be passed on to offspring and the [[ahaqsatir]] began their path into becoming the chosen and blessed of the river and of the [[Aluhăgal]].
